[MUSIC PLAYING]
ROMAN NURIK: Hello, and welcome
once again to "Android
Design in Action." I'm your
host, Roman Nurik.
ADAM KOCH: Hi, guys.
My name is Adam Koch.
ROMAN NURIK: Today we'll be
talking about podcast creators
and design tools.
Now when we talk about podcast
creators, we don't mean
podcast listeners, which I
believe the app clinic guys
have done before.
We're going to be talking
about podcast creation,
basically the process of
creating, recording, managing,
and then uploading your podcast
to whatever podcast
host you use.
So with that, should
we jump in?
ADAM KOCH: Let's go for it.
ROMAN NURIK: So when you talk
about podcast creation, you're
probably thinking about a couple
of different functions,
basic behaviors that
our podcast
creation app should offer.
The first is obviously
to record audio.
The second is probably to edit
and fine tune your audio.
So once you've done creating
or once you're done with a
recording, going in and then
trimming and changing things
and inserting effects and
muting-- things like that.
And then, of course,
management--
so just like any sort of blog
management app, you probably
want some way to publish items,
look at currently
published items, have a draft
mode for certain things, and
so on and so forth.
Then we also decided that for
podcast creation, or anything
that has a thick mode, you
do have two modes here.
You have the recording
mode, like I'm
currently capturing audio.
And that's something that the
user should be aware of,
almost like playing music.
If you're playing music, the
user should be aware at all
times that music is playing.
And that's why you see things
like a notification icon.
Or if you're in the app, you
see a persistent bar.
And the other obvious very thick
mode, or lack thereof,
is just the idle state or the
pause state where you're not
recording anything.
So with these high level
functions, we decided
to look then at--
actually, I forgot to mention,
we're not actually going to
redesign or re-imagine
any existing apps.
We're just going to go through
the process of designing a
hypothetical podcast
creation app.
So here's the first set of
things that we thought about.
The second set of things that
we thought about is the
underlying functions.
So for each of these main themes
for create and for edit
and for manager, you want to
have more specific bits of
functionality.
So for creation, you probably
want to have the ability to
start and resume recording
during the actual recording.
You want to be able to mute
and unmute probably, if
something comes up and you
want insert a silence.
And then you probably want to
insert either live sound
effects or clips, like an intro
clip or an outro clip or
fake applause or something
like that.
ADAM KOCH: A gong, you
always need a gong.
ROMAN NURIK: Yeah, the gong.
And then for edit, you want
things to be able to edit the
basic info, like the title and
description, the stuff that
basically appears in the RSS.
And then some basic editing
functions as well as
uploading, obviously.
You want to be able to upload
the final product to the
podcast host.
And then for management, you
obviously want to be able to
view the list of published
podcast episodes as well as
the list of drafts and maybe
manage the drafts somehow.
This is a very, very basic
podcast creation app that we
were thinking about.
We roughly broke things out into
these basic functions.
And this doing this type
of exercise helps
scope out the app.
And it's a very good idea to do
something like this before
jumping into the design
or the layout or
anything more detailed.
So with these high level
functions, we then looked at
some basic explorations
of layout.
So once you know what the app
does, you want to start
thinking about how it
roughly looks like
and it roughly behaves.
So we imagined a single a
podcast creation or recording
screen with a nice big
chronometer or whatever to
show the current time just so
you know how far into the
podcast you are.
You want those functions of
pause and resume and mute to
be available immediately.
And then you want to have some
way of exposing live effects,
so things like the intro clips,
the outro clips, the
gong, things like that.
You want to be to expose that.
And then there's a couple
of notes down there--
not very important.
Actually, one of the things I
wanted to mention is that
during the sketching process,
it's always important to think
about larger devices.
So these are some annotations
that as I was sketching, just
thinking, what would this
look like on tablets?
And some of these annotations
are just some very basic
things, like the multiple tabs
split out into multiple panes
on tablets.
And this happens in landscape
and so on.
So it's always good to
keep in mind things.
Even if you don't fully sketch
them out, just make note of
your thought process of how
things should adapt on
different devices.
The next thing we wanted
to do is look at
the different states.
So your app does have
two states.
It has a paused and
a recording state.
And then here's just some ideas
about what to do with
the Action bar, what
to do with the
Record and Pause button.
And another thing that's very
important on Android,
obviously, is notifications.
And we've mentioned this
probably a million times.
It's very important to have
really solid notifications.
So we immediately thought that
as one of these states, in
this recording state, we want
to have a notification,
especially if you're
not in the app.
And we just did a very quick
mock of what that could look
like with the Pause and Mute
actions in line with the
notifications.
ADAM KOCH: And of course, it's a
rich notification, which has
these Pause and Mute buttons
directly in the notification,
which is really nice.
ROMAN NURIK: And I think--
I'm not fully sure, I don't
remember the exact framework
details-- but I believe that
in a notification, you can
actually also specify
a chronometer.
So instead of showing the time,
you can show the time
elapsed for something.
So here, it's just showing the
time elapsed incrementing
every second.
So you can get a feel, an on the
fly updating feel for how
long the podcast currently is.
There's another note here.
This is something that's just
really important to annotate
your sketches to make sure that
you take down those brief
moments of thought that you
have when you're thinking
about all these different
things.
And then here's just another
quick sketch of what we
thought things could look like
on a tablet where again,
things are slightly bigger.
The time and display
is slightly bigger.
Things are slightly
rearranged.
But then your two tabs are then
split out into a multiple
panes, where you the live
effects on the right and the
recording stuff on the left.
So that was the sketching
process.
Obviously, this is a very
compressed design process.
In a real design process, you
want to sketch much more.
You want to iterate.
You want to show it to people
and get feedback.
We only had, basically,
a day to do this.
So we didn't go through
the whole process.
But once you're done with
sketches, once you have a good
feel of what things should look
like, the next step is to
do wire framing.
That's the one that we
already talked about.
So the next things is
to do wire framing.
So this looks a little the
higher fidelity than a regular
wire frame.
This is actually
in Illustrator.
This was done in Illustrator.
Most of our screen mock ups
are done in Photoshop.
This week we decided to do
things in Illustrator.
And you probably won't see
this here, but almost all
these elements are from the
stencil kit, which we'll talk
about that comes on
developer.androi
d.com/design/downloads.
And so they provide you
with fairly high
fidelity versions of things.
But you don't necessarily
have to do that.
You can use lower fidelity
stencils, even just squares
and rectangles just to get a
feel for the positioning.
But in this case, this is a
medium fidelity mock, where
it's not pixel perfect, but it
is using the actual visual
elements of Holo.
So here's what your management
screen can look like.
We roughly separated things out
into drafts and published.
So your drafts are probably
the thing you're thinking
about the most at any given
moment is, the next episode,
the next episode.
And so those are prioritized
at the top.
And then there's a little subtle
way to rearrange them.
Adam and I were talking
about this.
ADAM KOCH: Yeah, we were just
thinking, we actually don't
know a lot about creating
podcasts ourselves.
So depending on how you think
people create podcasts, you
could just prioritize these
based on last edited or last
viewed or something like that
instead of being able to
manually rearrange them using
those drag handles.
ROMAN NURIK: And if
you do that, you
should definitely mention--
like, over here, there's
April 8, April 1--
you should show last edited and
then a time, just so that
it's completely obvious what
the sort order is.
ADAM KOCH: Yeah, you could also
limit it to five most
recent and have something
that says, show all.
ROMAN NURIK: Yeah that's
definitely a good way.
You could actually do
this using tabs.
You could have drafts
and then published.
But this is a nicer way of
presenting everything at once
without having to burden the
user with extra navigation.
There's some minor things here
basically just the difference
between drafts and publishes,
which is the most important
thing, just to get the users
thinking about was most
important first.
So that's management.
We didn't go into all the
details of management.
Actually, there's one missing
screen shot here.
If you're managing multiple
podcasts, which you probably
should allow, a great way to do
that is using the spinner
navigation.
And actually, another thing here
is that there shouldn't
be an up icon, because there's
nowhere to go up.
So this is medium fidelity
mockups.
You're not going to get
the fullest view
of things from this.
Anyway, let's move on.
So next is the creation
and recording part.
And we spent a lot of time
thinking through this.
Since I think this is the most
unique aspect of a podcast
creation app, you have to really
think about what the
process of recording is like,
what the user experience is
like there.
The process of managing blog
post or managing podcast
episodes is very similar
to a blog.
So we didn't go into
detail there.
So some of the things
you could do here--
as you can see, this is what
it looks like on a tablet.
So we split things up into
Info and Record.
So Info is basically letting you
manage the basic details
of the episode, like title, the
description, things like that.
But the most important part
is the recording process.
So here, you'll see that there's
a nice big preview of
the current duration,
nice big affordances
for Pause and Mute.
And this interesting flourish--
and this is where
you can start exploring
different UI types,
interesting UI elements.
It's less interesting than
sketches, because it's a
little harder to visualize.
But once you get down to low
to medium fidelity wire
frames, you can start thinking
through different
interactions.
So in this case, we just
thought, wouldn't it be cool
if you have this bar that
changes height based on the
current volume?
And then from the left,
it actually
just creates the wave.
The wave is slowly progressing
to the left.
But this little bar here is
growing and shrinking.
And then when you're not
recording, it just goes away.
So that's one interesting
take on it.
I haven't seen that before.
And then another thing we did
here is we combined the live
effects into the screen.
So we took the standard
multi-pane approach.
We use a combination of tabs
and multi-pane here, but a
standard, great way
to use space.
ADAM KOCH: And this is nice,
because you obviously want
easy access to these effects
while you're recording,
whereas the info you can edit
once before when you're paused
or something like that.
ROMAN NURIK: Yeah, and we'll
see on the phone, you still
have access to this stuff.
But it's just one swipe away.
ADAM KOCH: It's just taking
advantage of the extra screen
on the larger device.
ROMAN NURIK: And then here, just
some examples of how you
can present clips and
live effects.
Obviously, pressing the dot,
dot, dot should take you to a
customization or more effects
screen or something like that.
So let's move on.
So here's what it'll look
like on a phone.
Again, very similar, it's just
that the effects portion is
taken into a separate tab.
And you have basically
the same UI.
It's somewhat responsive.
You still have slight changes
in core navigation between
tablet and phone.
But the core app is still
very much the same.
So this is the recording
state.
And now, what does it look
like in the pause state?
So in the pause state,
you no longer have
the option to mute.
Mute doesn't make sense.
And the Resume button
has basically
been given extra treatment.
Another thing I wanted to call
out is the Action Bar.
So if you're recording, the Up
button should probably just
take you up to the management
screen, that white
screen that we had.
And then you should show the
notification probably, or a
persistent Now Recording
bar at the bottom.
But if you're paused, it's an
indication that either you're
temporarily taking a break
or you're done.
You're actually done with
this recording session.
You'll record more later,
but you're done.
And so what we do is, we
actually changed the Action
Bar to go from showing the Up
button to or the Done button
to further give you the sense
that, hey, I can press Done.
And I can then from
there, publish.
We also looked at this
Info section,
so editing the details.
If you swipe over, you can
edit the title, the
description.
And you do still have this
persistent bar at the top to
indicate that something
is happening.
So you always want to
indicate that mode.
If you're in that thick, heavy
mode, like navigation or
playing music or something, you
always want to make sure
that there's something on screen
that indicates that.
And if it's in the app,
it could be a
persistent bar like this.
If you're out of the app, then
it should be a notification.
ADAM KOCH: And it's worth noting
as well that the Mute
and Pause buttons down here
are also persistent across
these tabs, because you see
it here in the Info.
And we saw on the
Record as well.
So that's that thick state
coming to the front again,
being able to control
it from any of
these different screens.
And then, of course, if you exit
out of the app, you've
got the notification there
to control it.
ROMAN NURIK: Yeah, and if you
swipe over to Effects--
and this is one of the biggest
reasons for this--
if you're in Effects, if you're
playing an intro clip,
you probably want to mute
yourself for a moment.
So you press Mute, press
the intro clip.
And soon as that's done
playing, you unmute.
So it's very easy from a single
screen at any point to
do what you want to do.
I think one of the last
components of this is, what
happens when you're in the Info
screen and you're paused?
At that point, you probably
want to give the user the
option to preview and publish.
If they press Preview and
Publish, it takes them to
separate flow, where
they can maybe even
edit, maybe make tweaks.
But they can preview what
they've currently recorded.
Once they're ready, it'll
upload using a ongoing
notification with an upload
progress, and then publish
when they're ready.
So pretty straightforward,
a lot of this stuff is.
There's nothing very
revolutionary.
But here, you just want to
approach a creation a podcast
creation app.
I think there's one more
screen on editing.
So we didn't spend the time to
figure out where this would go
into the greater scheme
of the app.
But one of the things that's
interesting is, this is a
different type of medium that
you're probably used to.
On Android, you're probably
used to editing photos or
editing text or selecting
text.
But you could use the same
metaphors and the same visuals
to apply to audio.
So you can do something like
long press on the audio to
select a second or so, and then
show those little drag
candles so that you can
drag them around.
And then you can have
an insertion point.
So if you have something
in the clipboard, then
you can do a paste.
You should also offer things--
we didn't show this here-- but
things like, fade out, fade
in, all sorts of effects.
Those are very contextual to the
current point in the audio
you're looking at.
So definitely make sure to use
this type of UI if you're
doing editing.
I think it would make
a lot of sense.
ADAM KOCH: And we were chatting
about a pretty neat
addition or feature where you
could possibly play the first
second of the selected clip and
maybe the last second as
well, so you can make sure that
your anchor points are at
the point you want them to be.
ROMAN NURIK: One way you could
do that is, you can offer
little play buttons here.
So a little play button,
and pressing that
plays the first second.
And the play button here that
plays the last second up to
that point, just so
you have the frame
perfect view of things.
Another thing I wanted to
mention is gestures.
So you also want to support
gestures, like multi-finger
gestures and the scrolling
gesture.
And if you're implementing
this--
I actually just wanted to
make a quick shout out.
There's an updated gestures
training class.
If you go to developer.androi
d.com/training/gestures,
there's a nice piece of sample
code that shows you how to do
all these different things with
all the different gesture
detectors to--
ADAM KOCH: It's a very nice
piece of sample code, written
by a very talented developer.
ROMAN NURIK: So with that,
I think that was
it for podcast creation.
I think we're about halfway.
So let's move on to
design tools.
So design tools--
when we talk about design tools,
we like to break things
out by the hat you wear,
the discipline.
So we don't just talk about,
here's the basic design tool
for designers.
There's different disciplines--
interaction
design, visual design, motion
design, asset production,
which is a very specific thing
to Android, creating
nine-patches and things
like that.
So we like to break down the
tools that you should be using
based on these hats
that people wear.
And you'll see a little circle
in each of these slides
indicating who this is for.
So the very first set of tools--
and this is very, very
obvious-- but the Adobe
Creative Suite.
And this is Illustrator,
Fireworks, Photoshop, InDesign.
Three things that I really
want to quickly call out.
The first is that we do have
official Android stencils
available for these.
And so what you saw today with
the podcast creation app was
using the official Android
stencils for Illustrator.
The next is that, most of the
Android design team, as far as
I know, they use Illustrator,
Fireworks, and Photoshop.
Illustrator is very,
very common with
our interaction designers.
For visual design, I think
mostly they use
Photoshop and Fireworks.
But Fireworks can actually
work really well for
interaction design as well,
because it can actually create
clickable sections, like you can
have interactive mockups.
I think I demoed this
two years ago.
You can create an interactive
PDF where you click on
different things, and it takes
you to different pages.
It's a much nicer way to
visualize a flow or to
visualize a sequence of
events in your app.
So definitely consider
doing that.
And there's a recent article on
smashingmag.com on how to
use InDesign to do something
very similar.
I haven't tried this myself,
but it seems really
interesting.
So if you're doing interaction
design, definitely check out
this article about InDesign
interaction design.
Let's move on to some other
interaction design tools.
For interaction design,
obviously, one of the things
you want to is sketch a lot--
a lot, a lot, a lot.
But there are also some software
tools for sketching
for creating wire frames
and especially
interactive wire frames.
Here's a quick selection
of them.
I generally prefer using
OmniGraffle, since we have
officials stencils for those.
And you could actually do both
low and high fidelity wire
frames there.
Almost all the other tools,
since they don't have the
official stencils, they have
unofficial stencils, which
aren't really high fidelity,
which is fine, for wire frames
it's totally OK.
And actually, the last three
here-- fluid UI, Proto.io and
Balsamiq Mockups--
those are also really good,
because they're web based.
And what that means is that
you can create actual
prototypes, deploy them to a
website, and share them with
your product manager.
I think you can create logins
for other design team members,
so you can have multiple members
of the design team
working on the same project
all along the web.
So some pretty cool
stuff there.
And then Proto.io was actually
something that Paul Burke
recently mentioned to us,
basically something that lets
you actually mock up gestures
as well as you can do, like
scrolling and swiping and
things like that.
So lots of good tools here.
And there's more than just
these, obviously, but here's
the quick selection
of some of them.
Here's what Fluid UI looks like,
just a quick example of
the interactive mockup
so you can create.
So in this case, this My Agenda
tab, when you click
that in the final interactive
HTML file, it actually takes
you to a different page, so you
can create these links.
It's really cool.
The next thing we wanted
to talk about was
Android Design Preview.
So this is more for
visual designers.
And this basically lets you
mirror a portion of your
screen from your computer
to your Android device.
So let's say you have Photoshop
open, and you have a
high fidelity visual
mockup open.
This is actually something from
one of our past episodes.
So all you need to do is, you
need to open up the Android
Design Preview app.
It's this little window
that pops up here.
You can then drag around
this red rectangle.
It's kind of faint.
You can't really see it.
But you drag it to encapsulate
your part of the screen that
you want to mirror And then it
mirrors that to your device.
What's not pictured here is the
USB cable that you need
plugged in.
So you do need to use USB, and
it doesn't work over Wi-Fi
currently, but it's definitely
a good tool to
have in your arsenal.
Next, we have--
actually, I'm going to spend a
little bit of time on this.
So a lot of designers on
Android, they often lament
that there's a lot of asset
production work to do.
And you have to create
nine-patches.
And you have to create all these
different states for
buttons and things and
tabs and whatnot.
And certainly, there
are a lot of things
you do need to create.
To create a really awesome app,
you need to think about
different screen densities
and things like that.
But there are a lot of
tools out there that
can help in the process.
And this is especially true if
you're following the Holo
visual language.
So if you have your completely
custom UI, there's not really
anything that'll help
you with that.
There are some tools, like some
Photoshop actions and
Fireworks plug-ins that
will do that.
But for the most part, if you're
following Holo, there's
some really good tools
online for this.
So the first is the Android
Asset Studio.
We covered this before, so I
won't go into detail on it.
But the next is the Actual Bar
Style Generator, which we
talked about in a
past episode.
I just want to reiterate
how important it
is to use this tool.
Basically, it lets you very
quickly throw in a few colors.
And it would generate all this
stuff, all the cruft, the XML
files, the PNG files, basically
everything that you
need to get your Action Bar
to base level of theming.
ADAM KOCH: It's a
good jump start.
And I think it's also compatible
with the Action Bar
Sherlock as well.
ROMAN NURIK: Yeah,
that's right.
So there's an option to create
Sherlock styles.
So if you're using Action
Bar Sherlock, it'll
just work with you.
And I just can't stress how
important it is to use this in
addition to Action Bar Sherlock,
in addition to the
core Action Bar APIs
rather than try to
build your own thing.
If you try to build your own
custom Action Bar, you're
going to have to re implement
a lot of stuff.
And it's just not going
to look as good.
So definitely use this
tool if you can.
And the last tool, which is, I
think, even more impressive in
its technical--
and the amount of stuff
it does for you is
Android Holo Colors.
So Android Holo Colors is very
similar to Action Bar, to the
Action Bar Style Generator,
except it creates UI
controls for you.
So if you want purple--
let's say your core brand
accent is purple--
if you want purple check boxes
and purple buttons and purple
text fields and everything,
Android Holo Colors will
generate all this for you.
You basically tell it which UI
controllers you want to create
or which controllers you plan on
using, and it will generate
those assets for you.
The last thing I wanted to
mention is, with the Action
Bar Style Generator, it's not
only good for creating Action
Bar assets, it's also good for
creating touch states.
So the standard touch state
on Android is this
semi-transparent blue overlay.
But let's say your brand
accent is not blue.
Let's say you want to actually
use something like red or
purple or whatever.
One of the things that the
Action Bar Style Generator
does is, it creates a stateless
drawable, which is
kind of a stateful graphic that
contains the assets for
the different states.
So if there's nothing, it's
just transparent.
If it's pressed, it will
actually use your accent color
as that overlay.
And if it's focused, meaning the
user has selected the item
with the keyboard, it'll use the
standard focus style with
different levels of
translucency.
But it'll still apply
your accent color.
So the Action Bar Style
Generator is really good for
generating that.
And I'd say that the combination
of these two tools
gets you most of the way for
baseline branding of an app.
So definitely use them--
really important to do that.
Last thing for design tools--
and we'll probably talk more
in future episodes
on design tools.
But the last thing I
wanted to call out
today is feedback tools.
So we very often provide
designers,
developers with feedback.
They give us PDFs.
We provide them with
feedback back.
So some of the tools that
we use are Google Drive,
specifically the Docs editor
as well as the PDF viewer.
PDF editor is like Preview on
Mac or Acrobat, and Skitch.
And so I'll briefly mention for
PDF editors, it's really,
really, really useful to be able
to just load up a set of
screenshots and just annotate.
PDFs have this awesome
annotation feature where you
can just drop in a text
bubble annotation.
And you can just really quickly
mark up all the
different things that you either
see wrong or you like
or whatever.
It's a good way for both
developers or product managers
to communicate with designers,
as well as for designers to
communicate to developers.
So designers, rather than using
specs or red lines if
you don't want to, you could
just create your mockups,
throw them into a PDF, and then
just annotate like, this
should stretch.
This should be whatever,
something else.
You could use PDF editors
or PDF annotations.
ADAM KOCH: We use this is a
feedback mechanism a lot.
It's worth noting, though,
that not all PDF viewer
support adding these
annotations, but a lot do.
So if you're looking for it in
your particular PDF viewer,
you may need to switch
to another one if
you can't find it.
ROMAN NURIK: Then for Google
Drive, one of the things I
love about Google Drive is
its commenting abilities.
So in Docs, you can just spawn a
comment thread on a specific
line of feedback.
And then in the image editor
or the image viewer are as
well as the PDF preview, I
believe there's a way to
highlight a certain portion and
start a comment thread on
a single rectangle.
So it's similar to the PDF
editor in the sense that you
can annotate things.
But certainly the combination of
these tools we found to be
super useful.
ADAM KOCH: It's nice when
there's a lot of back and
forth, when you've got a few
people commenting on a
particular issue.
ROMAN NURIK: And the last
one, I'd say, Skitch.
So Skitch is something that
basically lets you annotate
screenshots.
And it's really useful for
feedback on specific photos or
specific mockups.
It doesn't easily let you work
with multiple things at once,
multiple screenshots at once,
as far as I know.
But it's certainly very useful
for creating arrows and
annotations and things like that
on top of your mockups.
So these are just some
of the tools we use.
Like I said before, we'll
probably talk about it more in
the future.
So with that, let's just quickly
cover design news.
I think we only have one item.
The only item is from
Paul Burke.
So we mentioned, I think, in
the last show two weeks ago
that there was a New York City
Android designers meet up.
It went really well.
And if you came, then it
was great meeting you.
And thanks for coming.
But if you weren't there, Paul
actually shared a presentation
on some resources, some
good community
resources for designers.
So here's the link to
the presentation--
the slides.
Definitely take a look.
I think we'll probably be
posting another New York City
Android designers meet up
sometime next in the next
hopefully few months or so.
But yeah, thanks for
coming if you came.
I think that's it
for the show.
ADAM KOCH: One last thing, I
just want to give a shout out
to the App Clinic, the show that
our teammates run on the
West Coast.
They often delve more into the
technical side of things.
So definitely tune into
that later this week.
ROMAN NURIK: And they'll be
covering podcast creation
apps, as far as I know.
I don't know what they'll be
talking about, but something
related to podcast creation.
So if you like the podcast
creation stuff, tune in there.
Thanks for joining, guys.
As always, I'm Roman Nurik.
ADAM KOCH: My name's
Adam Koch.
See you guys.
ROMAN NURIK: Peace out.
[MUSIC PLAYING]